CALIFORNIA TENANT RIGHTS AND PROTECTIONS

CALIFORNIA CIVIL CODE ยง1940-1954: LANDLORD-TENANT PROVISIONS

ยง1941.1. Minimum habitability requirements for rental dwellings
(a) A dwelling shall be deemed untenantable for purposes of Section 1941 if it substantially lacks any of the following affirmative standard characteristics:
(1) Effective waterproofing and weather protection of roof and exterior walls, including unbroken windows and doors.
(2) Plumbing or gas facilities that conformed to applicable law in effect at the time of installation, maintained in good working order.
(3) A water supply approved under applicable law that is under the control of the tenant, capable of producing hot and cold running water, or a system that is under the control of the landlord, that produces hot and cold running water, furnished to appropriate fixtures, and connected to a sewage disposal system approved under applicable law.
(4) Heating facilities that conformed with applicable law at the time of installation, maintained in good working order.
(5) Electrical lighting, with wiring and electrical equipment that conformed with applicable law at the time of installation, maintained in good working order.
(6) Building, grounds, and appurtenances at the time of the commencement of the lease or rental agreement, and all areas under control of the landlord, kept in every part clean, sanitary, and free from all accumulations of debris, filth, rubbish, garbage, rodents, and vermin.
(7) An adequate number of appropriate receptacles for garbage and rubbish, in clean condition and good repair at the time of the commencement of the lease or rental agreement, with the landlord providing appropriate serviceable receptacles thereafter and being responsible for the clean condition and good repair of the receptacles under the landlord's control.
(8) Floors, stairways, and railings maintained in good repair.
(9) A locking mail receptacle for each residential unit in a residential hotel, as required by Section 17958.3 of the Health and Safety Code. This subdivision shall apply only to a residential hotel that has been issued a certificate of occupancy and only when the residential hotel has a system for mail delivery by the United States Postal Service.

ยง1942. Repairs by tenant; rent deduction
(a) If within a reasonable time after written or oral notice to the landlord or his agent, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1962, of dilapidations rendering the premises untenantable which the landlord ought to repair, the landlord neglects to do so, the tenant may repair the dilapidations himself where the cost of such repairs does not require an expenditure more than one month's rent of the premises and deduct the expenses of such repairs from the rent when due, or the tenant may vacate the premises, in which case the tenant shall be discharged from further payment of rent, or performance of other conditions as of the date of vacating the premises.

ยง1942.4. Landlord's noncompliance with habitability requirements; Notice of violation from public agency; Damages; Preemption of local ordinance
(a) A landlord of a dwelling may not demand rent, collect rent, issue a notice of a rent increase, or issue a three-day notice to pay rent or quit pursuant to subdivision (2) of Section 1161 of the Code of Civil Procedure, if all of the following conditions exist prior to the landlord's demand or notice:
(1) The dwelling substantially lacks any of the affirmative standard characteristics listed in Section 1941.1 or violates Section 17920.10 of the Health and Safety Code, or is deemed and declared substandard as set forth in Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code because conditions listed in that section exist to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants of the dwelling.
(2) A public officer or employee who is responsible for the enforcement of any housing law, after inspecting the premises, has notified the landlord or the landlord's agent in writing of his or her obligations to abate the nuisance or repair the substandard conditions.
(3) The conditions have existed and have not been abated 35 days beyond the date of service of the notice specified in paragraph (2) and the delay is without good cause. For purposes of this subdivision, service shall be complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail.
(4) The conditions were not caused by an act or omission of the tenant or lessee in violation of Section 1929 or 1941.2.

SAN FRANCISCO RENT ORDINANCE

SEC. 37.3. RENT LIMITATIONS
(a) Rent Increase Limitations for Tenants in Occupancy. Except as provided in Subsections (a)(1), (2), (3), (10), and (11), landlords may impose rent increases upon tenants in occupancy only as provided below and as provided by Subsection 37.3(d):
(1) Annual Rent Increase. On March 1st of each year, the Board shall publish the increase in the CPI for the preceding 12 months, as made available by the U.S. Department of Labor. A landlord may impose annually a rent increase which does not exceed a tenant's base rent by more than 60% of said published increase. In no case, however, shall the allowable annual increase be greater than 7%.

SEC. 37.10B. TENANT HARASSMENT
(a) No landlord, and no agent, contractor, subcontractor or employee of the landlord shall do any of the following in bad faith or with ulterior motive or without honest intent:
(1) Interrupt, terminate or fail to provide housing services required by contract or by State, County or local housing, health or safety laws;
(2) Fail to perform repairs and maintenance required by contract or by State, County or local housing, health or safety laws;
(3) Fail to exercise due diligence in completing repairs and maintenance once undertaken or fail to follow appropriate industry repair, containment or remediation protocols designed to minimize exposure to noise, dust, lead, paint, mold, asbestos, or other building materials with potentially harmful health impacts;
(4) Abuse the landlord's right of access into a rental housing unit as that right is provided by law;
(5) Influence or attempt to influence a tenant to vacate a rental housing unit through fraud, intimidation or coercion;
(6) Attempt to coerce the tenant to vacate with offer(s) of payments to vacate which are accompanied with threats or intimidation;
(7) Continue to offer payments to vacate after tenant has notified the landlord in writing that they no longer wish to receive further offers of payments to vacate;
(8) Threaten the tenant, by word or gesture, with physical harm;
(9) Violate any law which prohibits discrimination based on actual or perceived race, gender, sexual preference, sexual orientation, ethnic background, nationality, place of birth, immigration or citizenship status, religion, age, parenthood, marriage, pregnancy, disability, AIDS or occupancy by a minor child;
(10) Interfere with a tenant's right to quiet use and enjoyment of a rental housing unit as that right is provided by law;
(11) Refuse to accept or acknowledge receipt of a tenant's lawful rent payment;
(12) Refuse to cash a rent check for over 30 days;
(13) Interfere with a tenant's right to privacy;
(14) Request information that violates a tenant's right to privacy, including but not limited to residence or citizenship status or social security number. 